Draft account lifecycle (#6473)
gravitational/teleport: rfd/0029-account-lifecycle.md

We will use the vendored EFF long list via diceware library

https://github.com/sethvargo/go-diceware

The token is 8 word token resulting in roughly [~100 bits of entropy](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2016/07/new-wordlists-random-passphrases).

Once signed up, users will be presented with the recovery tokens printed on the
screen with a message:

```
Please save these account recovery tokens in a safe offline place.
You can use each token once if you loose your second factor or a password.

* tele-example-teleport-sh-cosponsor-happening-moocher-undrilled-royal-depravity-frustrate-starting
* tele-example-teleport-sh-factoid-shorten-koala-explore-retinal-lazy-coauthor-brethren
* tele-example-teleport-sh-thinness-suspect-shrink-dwindle-awning-engulf-thrift-spoiling
```

Customers can use cloud prefix in case if they forget the domain name as well.
Teleport cloud scanners can look for `tele-` prefix and alert customers with
domain names in the prefix about leaked tokens.

All 3 tokens are regenerated in batch every time account recovery is successfull.
Each token can only be used one time successfully or unsuccessfully.

> Teleport should store tokens encrypted with `crypto/bcrypt` and compare using constant-time compare.

Reviewer: I think considerations are probably needed around rate limiting the API as well.

* If the operation is aborted after user enters the token, but fails to enter the password,
the valid token is no longer used, but remaining tokens can be used.
* If a user tries to reuse the token, 

This flow ensures two factors are verified: the valid password and a recovery token.

**User lost a password**

If user lost a password, but not a second factor, they could recover using
a recovery link sent to their email and a second factor:

* User enters their username and clicks forgot password.
* User clicks have to present a valid second factor and a recovery token,
after that they will be able to reset their password.
* All recovery tokens are no longer valid. The new set of recovery tokens are printed to the user.
* User has to confirm that they have copied recovery tokens.
* The session is not initiated. A user is redirected to a login form
with UI displaying a message to login using new credentials.

This flow ensure that two factors are verified:

* Second factor TOTP token or U2F device.
* A valid account recovery token.

* We do not consider email as a valid verification factor. It's a nice-to-have additional protection layer.

> The email transport is not guaranteed to be secure, and email itself can be hacked.

Reviewer: I think this is leftover from a previous version

**Getting new tokens**

If any user is logged into Teleport UI, they can regenerate new password recovery tokens:

* Alice goes to her account settings and chooses to generate new set of recovery tokens.
* Teleport asks for a second factor before generating tokens.

> * A new set of tokens is printed for Alice. The message makes it clear

Reviewer: The message should probably come before or both before and when shown the tokens.

tokens are invalid.

**Internal request for cancelling the account**

To request account cancellation, any account owner should:

* Be logged into Teleport UI.
* Press a "cancel my account" button in the UI.
* UI should verify that they own a second factor.
* Verify that they have write permission on the billing.

```
We have marked your account as inactive. In 10 days, we are going to delete the account and all it's data.
To prevent this, log into Teleport and press "revert account cancelation".
```

The account enters inactive state:

**Inactive account state**

* Teleport should not disconnect any resources connected to the cloud account during the grace period.
Otherwise it is possible for attacker overtaking an account owner to cause system wide outage.
* Account owner will be able to login in the account, but will
see message of the day displayed in UI and CLI:

```
Your account was marked as inactive at the request of `email`. In 10 days, we are going to delete the account and all it's data.
```

* Any user with `billing` write permission can login into the account and is greeted with a warning:

```
Your account was marked as inactive at the request of `email`.

> To prevent account from being deleted, log into Teleport and press "revert account cancelation".

Reviewer: aren't they already logged in at this point?

```

> All other users with billing write permission should receive the email with the same message as above.

Reviewer: we should consider repeating the email a couple times over this 10 day period.

Any account owner should be able to revert account cancellation.
We should ask already logged in account owner for a second factor proof to revert account cancellation to prevent
a possible account overtake by a malicious actor who wishes to keep the account for accessing
the resources.

Once system leaves from inactive account state, all account owners
should receive an email:

```
Your account was marked as active at the request of `email`.
```

The possible vectors of attack is for malicious actor to overtake someone's
account with a request to delete all the data. The grace period and active privileged
user should mitigate against that. Email sent to other account owners
should alert other owners about account cancellation.

If there are no other owners, other active users will notice the message of the day in the UI and CLI.

> Teleport cloud support should be able to revert account cancelation if they see a zendesk

Reviewer: I wonder if this truly should be able to revert, or just delay/extend? Otherwise this looks like a reversal based on just email, in which case the process could just send an email link to be equivelant.

The flow will work for cloud and non-cloud accounts. For cloud it should be impossible
to turn off second factor. For self-hosted, if second factor is off, the account recovery
should not be possible.

Each local user will receive 3 account recovery tokens on sign up.

Each token is a crypto-randomly generated passphrase string that could be used only once.

We will use the vendored EFF long list via diceware library

https://github.com/sethvargo/go-diceware

The token is 8 word token resulting in roughly [~100 bits of entropy](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2016/07/new-wordlists-random-passphrases).

Once signed up, users will be presented with the recovery tokens printed on the
screen with a message:

```
Please save these account recovery tokens in a safe offline place.
You can use each token once if you loose your second factor or a password.

* tele-example-teleport-sh-cosponsor-happening-moocher-undrilled-royal-depravity-frustrate-starting
* tele-example-teleport-sh-factoid-shorten-koala-explore-retinal-lazy-coauthor-brethren
* tele-example-teleport-sh-thinness-suspect-shrink-dwindle-awning-engulf-thrift-spoiling
```

> Customers can use cloud prefix in case if they forget the domain name as well.

Author: we can use it to scan repos and customers can learn what DNS name is associated with a recovery token

> Customers can use cloud prefix in case if they forget the domain name as well.

Reviewer: github for example has this program: https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/secret-security/about-secret-scanning

> Customers can use cloud prefix in case if they forget the domain name as well.

Reviewer 2: Hopefully this is what you meant:
```suggestion
Customers check the recovery token prefix if they forget their domain name.
```

Self hosted Teleport will not send any emails.

**Account owners**

Teleport considers any user with delete `account` resource permission
as account owner. This doc refers to those users as account owner users.

The `account` resource is a new resource that only allows to request
account cancellation.

We will recommend to have several account owners, users who do not have system administration
privileges and can't modify roles, or users.

Any other users are referred to as simply users.

**User lost a second factor**

If any user lost a second factor, but not password, they can add a new second factor using
a recovery token:

* Login with a username and password.
* Instead of pressing second factor, enter a one-time recovery token
* Enroll new second factor.
* All recovery tokens are no longer valid. The new set of recovery tokens are printed to the user.
* User has to confirm that they have copied recovery tokens.
* The session is not initiated. A user is redirected to a login form
with UI displaying a message to login using new credentials.

* If the operation is aborted after user enters the token, but fails to enter the password,

> the valid token is no longer used, but remaining tokens can be used.

Reviewer 2: Above, the user enters username and password first. They don't get to consume a token before passing the password prompt

Reviewer: I wonder if this leaks what is/is not a valid password? IE if I need to enter a valid password to get to the token recovery screen. On the other hand, I think that's how many other systems works anyways, which I suspect is more an artifact of 2fa being optionally enabled. Enter the password, see the account has 2fa, so then challenge for 2fa. 

Don't know if it's worth pursuing or not.

Author: I think it's fine for now - after all, they will be locked out after several invalid attempts, so would be hard to brute-force.

> * If the operation is aborted after user enters the token, but fails to enter the password,
> the valid token is no longer used, but remaining tokens can be used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If the operation is aborted after user enters the token, but fails to enter the password,
the used token is no longer valid, but remaining tokens can be used.
```

> * If a user tries to reuse the token, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If a user tries to reuse the token, it is rejected
```

This flow ensures two factors are verified: the valid password and a recovery token.

**User lost a password**

If user lost a password, but not a second factor, they could recover using

> a recovery link sent to their email and a second factor:

Reviewer 3: What happens when an admin resets user credentials via:

```
tctl users reset sam@example.com
```

I support this command will also reset user tokens as well, right?

> a recovery link sent to their email and a second factor:

Author: yes, updated

* User enters their username and clicks forgot password.

> * User clicks have to present a valid second factor and a recovery token,
> after that they will be able to reset their password.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* User has to present a valid second factor and a recovery token,
after that they will be able to reset their password.
```

* Teleport asks for a second factor before generating tokens and makes it clear that once
selected, old sets of tokens will not be valid, they will be printed once and user
should be prepared to store them in offline place.
* A new set of tokens is printed for Alice. The message makes it clear
that once closed, the tokens are no longer going to be revealed and that any previous
tokens are invalid.

**Internal request for canceling the account**

To request account cancellation, any account owner should:

* Be logged into Teleport UI.
* Press a "cancel my account" button in the UI.
* UI should verify that they own a second factor.
* Verify that they have write permission on the billing.

```
We have marked your account as inactive. In 10 days, we are going to delete the account and all it's data.
To prevent this, log into Teleport and press "revert account cancellation".
```

The account enters inactive state:

**Inactive account state**

* Teleport should not disconnect any resources connected to the cloud account during the grace period.
Otherwise it is possible for attacker overtaking an account owner to cause system wide outage.

> * Account owner will be able to login in the account, but will

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Users will be able to login in the account, but will
```

Author: I've updated to lock all non-account owner users out of inactive account.

```

This email notification should be sent every 3 days to all account owners until the account is deleted.

Any account owner should be able to revert account cancellation.

Teleport will ask logged in account owner for a second factor proof to revert account cancellation to prevent
a possible account overtake by a malicious actor who wishes to keep the account for accessing
the resources.

Once system leaves inactive account state, all account owners
should receive an email:

```
Your account was marked as active at the request of `email`.
```

The possible vectors of attack is for malicious actor to overtake someone's
account with a request to delete all the data. The grace period and active privileged
user should mitigate against that. Email sent to other account owners
should alert other owners about account cancellation.

If there are no other owners, other active users will notice the message of the day in the UI and CLI.

Teleport cloud support should be able to delay account cancellation by 10 days if they see a zendesk
issue from any zendesk account.

> **When all is lost*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**When all is lost**
```

This flow is only relevant for Cloud.

If any user or account owner used their and other shared email address, they won't be able to recover
their account with us, but can request cancellation. There is no way for Teleport to associate users

> with social accounts and the account or company name.

Reviewer 2: What kinds of email addresses are limited here (the phrasing is a bit confusing)?

Let's say I'm a hobbyist trying out Teleport Cloud.
I sign up with my private email address.
Why can't Teleport Cloud send an account reset link to that same address?

Author: If we send an account reset link, this will always downgrade all our two factor authentication to just one factor - email.

So the attacker would not bother hacking any of our two factors, they would just need to hack the email address. 
SMTP protocol is not very secure either - it does not guarantee encryption all the way. The attacker could perform a downgrade attack or MITM. [MTA-STS](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8461) could improve things, but still :)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If any user or account owner lost their password, second factor and recovery tokens, they won't be able to recover
their account with us, but can request cancellation. We cannot trust account recovery using email verification alone.
```

Account owners should:

> * Request account cancellation by clicking on "cancel my account link" URL.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Request account cancellation by clicking on "cancel my account" link.
```

* We email crypto random 32 byte hex cancel account link to their email address.
* They click the link and we mark the account as "inactive".

The account enters inactive state described above.

**One owner warning**

> For cloud, if there is only account owner, display a system

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For cloud, if there is only one account owner, display a system
```

* The session is not initiated. A user is redirected to a login form
with UI displaying a message to login using new credentials.
* If the operation is aborted after user enters the token, but fails to complete recovery,
the used token is no longer valid, but remaining tokens can be used.
* If a user tries to reuse the token, it is rejected.

This flow ensures two factors are verified: the valid password and a recovery token.

**User lost a password**

If user lost a password, but not a second factor, they could recover using
a recovery link sent to their email:

* User enters their username and clicks forgot password.
* User has to present a valid second factor and a recovery token,
after that they will be able to reset their password.
* All recovery tokens are no longer valid. The new set of recovery tokens are printed to the user.
* User has to confirm that they have copied recovery tokens.
* The session is not initiated. A user is redirected to a login form
with UI displaying a message to login using new credentials.

This flow ensure that two factors are verified:

* Second factor TOTP token or U2F device.
* A valid account recovery token.

> **Getting new tokens**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**User lost recovery tokens**
```
